        ECON 57: Economic Statistics - R Programming
                          Lab 1
                              Augusto Gonzalez Bonorino
                                   September 14, 2023


           The labs in ECON 57: Economic Statistics are designed to solidify your
       comprehension of course concepts while fostering problem-solving skills. By en-
       gaging in hands-on coding exercises, you’ll reinforce your understanding of vari-
       ables, data types, conditionals, and more. As exercises progressively increase
       in complexity, you’ll develop the analytical mindset required for addressing in-
       tricate economic questions. These labs also encourage independent learning by
       introducing concepts not yet covered in class. Utilizing external resources like
       Google, Stack Overflow, or ChatGPT mirrors real-world problem-solving sce-
       narios, empowering you to effectively apply your existing knowledge. Embrace
       these challenges as opportunities to grow, both in coding prowess and in your
       grasp of the dynamic relationship between statistics and economics.
           All of these exercises can be solved with chatGPT. I encourage you to take
       the hard route and first give them a genuine try yourself, utilizing chatGPT as
       an assistant to help you brainstorm, fix bugs or test ideas instead of having it
       do all the work for you.



          Submission guidelines: All of your work should be done in an R notebook.
       Create an R notebook in Rstudio and name it with the following format ”first-
       Name LastName Lab1.rmd”. Write your solutions in separate code cells and
       use markdown to format the notebook. This lab is due Friday September
       22 at 11:59pm.




Exercise 1: Define and provide an example for each of the following R data types:
            integer, float, string, boolean, vector, factor. How might these data types
            be used to represent economic data?
Exercise 2: Create a boolean variable isStudent and set it to TRUE. Use an if-else
            statement to print ”You are a student” if isStudent is true, otherwise
            print ”You are not a student.”



                                              1
Exercise 3: Create a vector testScores with 9 sample test scores from 0 to 100 (e.g.,
            85, 92, 78, 60). Calculate the mean, median, standard deviation, and vari-
            ance using the built-in R functions and manually by following the equa-
            tions. Hint: A summation con be implemented with loops. Remember to
            have an anchor variable to store your value as the loop progresses.

Exercise 4: Create a matrix sales representing sales data for three products over four
            quarters. Populate it with sample sales figures. Calculate and print the
            total sales for each product and quarter.
Exercise 5: Write a function that takes in a vector of incomes and prints out the
            income along with the income group they belong to (low-income less than
            20000, middle-income greater than 20000 but less than 75000, and high-
            income if greater than 75000). Test you function with the following vector
            c(12000, 10000, 45222, 4500, 120000, 60000, 87000). Hint: You will need
            to implement your knowledge of conditionals and the paste() function to
            combine strings with variables. A sample output may look like ”12000 -
            low income, 10000 - low income, 45222 - middle income, ...”.

Exercise 6: Create a bar chart to visualize the distribution of categorical data repre-
            senting the preferred mode of transportation among students. For this,
            set on 3 methods of transportation and collect data by interviewing at
            least 10 of your friends or classmates.

Exercise 7: Write a function that calculates the factorial of a given positive integer.
            Test the function with different values and save each distinct result in a
            vector. Plot a scatterplot where the y-axis represents the output of your
            function (stored in the vector you just created) and the x-axis the input.
Exercise 8: Create a loop to print the first 10 even numbers.




                                              2
